todo: add to haxe.txt

just a temp place to leave some notes i get from the web with my iPad
or from vim/server

the haxe cookbook is a really nice way to learn some stuff
  - https://code.haxe.org/category/principles/everything-is-an-expression.html
  
ruby0x1 (of luxe) has a few well written posts about haxe!
https://notes.underscorediscovery.com/tag/haxe/
  - https://notes.underscorediscovery.com/haxe-from-1000ft/
    - https://notes.underscorediscovery.com/haxe-entry-point/
  - https://notes.underscorediscovery.com/haxe-compile-time-macros/

http://snowkit.github.io/linc/
  - this seems like a cool way to just use pop C++ libs, but still retain Haxe...
  
  
  
notes form ruby0x1:
https://notes.underscorediscovery.com/haxe-from-1000ft/
Haxe is a high level modern programming toolkit that compiles to a multitude of languages (c#, c++, java, js, python, php, etc). 

The Haxe Toolkit:
Now that we see that Haxe includes a programming language, what else does the Haxe Toolkit include? (more details on haxe.org)
The programming language
The (cross) compiler
The standard library

What does that compiler generate? Code in a target language and depending on the target, a binary of sorts. Let's look at a simple example.

Given App.hx as a Haxe class, let's see an example of how to get a target language file from a Haxe file:

haxe -main App -python app.py
haxe -main App -js app.js


noteable compiler utilities:
There are so many to list, because of the wide number of targets, but I'll short list some of my favourite ones :
insanely fast
documentation (hopefully not xml anymore...)
code completion (hopefully not xml anymore...)


the standard library:
When you're writing code in general, and especially cross platform code, it's really helpful (and often important) to have code that works the same across all targets.

This is what the standard library is for. There are a myriad of classes in there, way too many to list here, but let's pick a few for examples of the type of thing that are "built in" to the language and are often available on every target.

target specific utilities:
On top of common tools and types and utilities, the standard library includes a lot of options for each target individually, allowing maximum use of the underlying language features.

Some easy examples: File/FileSystem access.



Using the generated code:
As this is a large and open ended topic, I will only give a few simple examples for you to understand how to use the low level code output in another project or as part of a project. This is ALWAYS going to be dependent on the actual language output you are targeting. For example, C# can use dll's really easily, or C++ target can generate as a static library, etc. Each target usage differs based on where you will use it.
...

js example 
JS is straight forward, you simply load it in an HTML file in the browser or in node.js or other interpreters.
...

C# example
With Haxe code written say as a library for use in C# tools (like Unity, Mono, etc) you can directly generate a .dll file for immediate use as a reference. The code can also be included in the project manually, and the -D no-root flag will keep all the Haxe code in it's own namespace to avoid conflicts.

Java example
A good example of a Java use case would be an Android plugin. If you add the android.jar library to your class path in the hxml file or command line, you can compile immediately usable jar files from Haxe code that call the native android api's directly. 
Here's an example class, written in Haxe, that opens a URL in the device default browser as a new Activity. This Haxe class is compiled into a .jar file, and is then usable in any android project thanks to the Haxe cross compiler, and the Haxe java backend.


Haxe is a low-level toolkit:
...
frameworks, bindings, native externs and cross target implementations are written by third party developers, to give you access to these things in your Haxe code.

Continuing with the js target example, how about JQuery? What about node.js? Pixi.js? Phaser? What about some audio for the js web target, like Howler.js.

All of these offer strongly typed, ready to use bindings for just one of the many targets.

Certain targets like C++ and C# are a bit more complicated due to the nature of different compilers and runtimes, but there are still many frameworks and bindings available to you for any number of things.

...

on backends:
Often a target has it's own implementation of all of the backend details, and standard lib implementation specifics. These are an automatic dependency when targeting that platform, as they make all the generated code work, but the process is transparent to you provided you have them installed through haxelib. For example, haxelib install hxjava would install the java backend, hxcs and hxcpp are the C# and C++ backends respectively.

on neko:
Neko is a VM (Virtual Machine) that runs code written in the neko programming language. The neko language is not intended to be programmed manually, but rather is a generated language that allows running the code (often bytecode) across multiple platforms through the virtual machine. You can think along the lines of lua or other VM's that run bytecode interpreted at runtime.

neko is a Haxe target:
Haxe code can be compiled directly to neko bytecode, which can then be loaded into a neko VM. A good example: mod_neko which runs on Apache web server, can run Haxe code on the server side, much like you would install mod_php and run php files, mod_neko runs neko files. Lot's of frameworks and developers use neko on the server, and code their backend in Haxe. The haxelib server and site are all written in Haxe.

Neko bytecode is cross platform 
This makes it a great candidate for using Haxe to write cross platform command line utilities. The reason you see neko when Haxe is running, is because the Haxe toolkit includes neko (and its tools) and uses it for many things. Again, haxelib, the Haxe package manager, allows packages to include a run.n file, a neko file compiled from Haxe, that will run when a user calls haxelib run yourpackage. This is powerful because you only need one file, and it will run on every target that you support in your code, with full access to the standard library and more.
Neko is useful for these types of tools and includes features like nekotools -boot bytecode.n, which will generate a binary for a plaform (like a windows exe or mac binary), should you want to distribute the tool standalone. Neko also compiles really quickly, because Haxe is fast at compiling and the generated bytecode has no compile step.

Finally, because Haxe includes neko in the installer and is dependent on it, it's a reliable tool that many frameworks and developers lean on to do their bidding. If you're going to be using Haxe and writing tools, it's a great option for scripting user facing utilities that will have no dependencies and be cross platform.

notes about platform vs target
[cross platform and cross target development]
A platform is a host environment that runs code.
web/mac/windows/linux/ios/android
A target is a language target that haxe compiles to
c++/c#/java/js/python/etc
The important distinction is that a single language target can and will run on multiple platforms. For example, the c++ backend will run on iOS, Android, Mac, Windows, Linux, Blackberry, Tizen and quite a few others. It also supports custom toolchains for things like consoles and native cross compilers and makes it easy to compile the c++ using it's build tools, to any C++ supported platform.

JS output can run on node.js or other interpreter based platforms. Python can run on any platform with a python interpreter. PHP as well. The targets and platforms are not the same thing.

on the shoulders of a giant:
...
NME (native media engine)
long standing media and game framework loosely based on flash API's
the original backbone of many frameworks and tools

OpenFL (Open Flash Library)
forked from NME originally to align closer to Flash API
general purpose framework based on Flash 2D API
many game frameworks built on top of it, HaxeFlixel, HaxePunk, etc
many tools built dependent on it like haxeui

UFront
large, powerful MVC web backend/frontend framework
compiles to php/neko

  
  
  
  
  
https://notes.underscorediscovery.com/haxe-entry-point/
my notes:
this post is more of a tutorial of one's first program, but crucially going over haxelib and hxml in detail

hxml is basically just a list of the `haxe` command's arguments, for example

the command:
haxe -main game -lib heaps -cmd ./game.exe

would look like this in a .hxml file:
-main game
-lib heaps
# this runs a command after the previous commands are done
-cmd ./game.exe

the -next flag begins a new haxe build command, but in the same file:
-main dependency
-next
-main game

...

Importing code from the library
Now we need to reference some code from arguable. We do this using the import statement. Import statements must be before everything else in the file, so it goes right at the top of our class.

Class paths 
The import statement basically checks a list of locations called the class path to see if the module you are looking for is in there. Our example: import arguable.ArgParser;

If you look at the haxelib install log above, you will notice that arguable/ArgParser.hx is actually just a file within a folder. This is no coincidence! A . within the import statement is stepping one depth lower into the class path. This is true for a folder (a package), or a Module (multiple types within one hx file) - more on that below.

By using -lib arguable, we add the location of that folder that haxelib is keeping track of - to the class path. Now, when some Haxe code says import arguable.ArgParser;, the modules within the class path are checked. Since a single file on disk can contain multiple types, the file that contains them is called a Module. hint: You can also look up the -cp command, it adds a package folder manually.

Since that's all we need to know about that for now,

What about packages? 
A package is a folder within the class path. arguable. is the package, ArgParser is the module. import arguable.ArgParser; tells Haxe to look inside the arguable package folder(s) and find a module called ArgParser. Simple enough!

This brings up an important rule of understanding in Haxe:

Modules/Classes MUST start with a Capital Letter
packages/folders MUST start with lower case
This is how you tell the difference between game.Game and Game.game. 
Small letter: package (reaching into a folder). 
Capital letter: A haxe class (module).

In this obtuse example, Game.game is a static variable on the class called Game, and game.Game implies that the Game class is in a folder called game/. Ideally you wouldn't name things in such convoluted ways, but with this simple rule you can always tell the difference.

...

Some notes: I have intentionally specified the 'full name' for sys.io.Process. This is an alternative to using import, and is important when you might have to modules/classes with overlapping names. I like to keep haxe API names explicit, so myself and others can easily look them up.
 
...
(my notes)
can use Sys.args to get args from a command-line execution
...
One thing you'll notice is the HaxelibCounter.hx:48: stuff, that comes from trace, which is really important for debugging effectively. But since our tool will be user facing, we want to remove that from the output. For this, Sys.println is available, which will print to the command line without any prefixes.

We can use a built in define for this: #if debug. Haxe has a -debug command line option which enables more debug related features, depending on the target. It also defines the debug conditional which we can use to swap between clean logging and debug logging. When we want to debug, we uncomment the #-debug line from inside our hxml (shown later) and in the code :
 
 
 
 
  

thoughts 'n quirks from my game dev:

if(this-is-null) throw ("this is not bool")

 // TODO: are strings set by value? yes, they are!

is3d = false; // TODO: maybe can't have field names begin with a number?

the Std (standard) package is automatically imported

package ra; // package name it not automatically implied by file-path
// without it, it will use the top-most name-space

if the module/package doesn't match the file-path
  - add "-cp path-to-modules" to hxml file

 // this.super() doesn't work, must use just super()

import ra.hp.* // doesn't work recursively...

//this = null; // TODO: FAIL, lol    

// note: classes have new instead of class name / standard constructor

// TODO: init in constuctor vs in init()
hmm, why ever seperate this?


naming:
classes at least two characters so that refactoring isn't bad, and that ctags 'n autocomplete all work okay
PunkApp extends App


std.Int() // no (Int)floatyNumber


// TODO: haxe.std not showing up in autocompletion...
